The following is a conversation with Elon Musk. His third time on this, the Lex Friedman podcast. Yeah, make yourself comfortable. Boo. Wow. Okay. Did you don't do the headphone thing? No. Okay. I mean, how close do I get needs to get the same thing? The closer you are, the sexier you sound. Hey, babe. Yeah. Can't get enough of the audio. Baby. I'm gonna clip that out. Anytime somebody messes with me about you. You watch my body and you think I'm sexy. Come right out and tell me so. So good. Okay. Serious mode activate. All right. Serious mode. One, you're Russian. You can be serious. Everyone's serious all the time in Russia. Yeah. Yeah. We'll get there. We'll get there. Yeah. It's gotten soft. Allow me to say that the SpaceX launch of human beings to orbit on May 30th. 2020 was seen by many as the first step in a new era of human space exploration. These human space flight missions were a beacon of hope to me and to millions over the past two years. Our world has been going through one of the most difficult periods in recent human history. We saw, we see the rise of division, fear, cynicism and the loss of common humanity. Right when it is needed most. So first, Elon, let me say thank you for giving the world hope and reason to be excited about the future. Oh, it's kind of you to say, I do want to do that. Humanity has obviously a lot of issues and and you know, people at times do do bad things, but you know, despite all that, you know, I love humanity and I think we should make sure we do everything we can to have a good future and an exciting future. And one where that maximizes the happiness of the people. Let me ask about the Crew Dragon demo too. So that that first flight with humans on board, how did you feel leading up to that launch? We scared. Are you excited? I was going through your mind. So much was a stake. Yeah, no, that was extremely stressful. The question we obviously cannot. Let them down anyway. So extremely stressful, I'd say, just at least we did. I was confident that at the time that we launched that no one could think of anything at all to do that would improve the probability of success. And we racked our brains to think of any possible way to improve the probability of success. We cannot think of anything more and nor could NASA. And so then that's just the best that we could do. So then we had we went ahead and launched. Now I'm not a religious person, but I nonetheless got on my knees and prayed for that mission. We able to sleep? No. How did I feel when it was a success? First, when the launch was a success and when they returned back home or back to Earth? There's a great relief. Yeah. It's for a high-striest situation. I find it's not so much elation as relief. And I think once as we got more comfortable and proved out the systems because we really you've got to make sure everything works. It was definitely a lot more enjoyable with the subsequent ash-nord missions. And I thought the inspiration mission was actually very inspiring. Inspiration for mission. I'd encourage people to watch the inspiration documentary on Netflix. It's actually really good. And it really isn't so I was actually inspired by that. And I so that one I felt I was kind of able to enjoy the actual mission, not just be super stressed all the time. For people that somehow don't know, it's the all civilian first time, all civilian out to space, out to orbit. Yeah, and it was the highest orbit in like 30 or 40 years or something. The only one that was higher was the one shuttle, sorry, a Hubble servicing mission. And then before that it would have been Apollo in 72. It's pretty wild. So it's cool. It's got you know, I think as you know, as a species like we want to be, you know, continuing to do better and reach higher ground and like I think it would be tragic, extremely tragic if Apollo was the high watermark for humanity, you know, and that's as far as we ever got. And it's it's concerning that here we are. 49 years after the last mission to the moon. And so almost half a century. And we've not been back. And that's that's worrying. It's like is that does that mean we've peaked as a civilization or what so. Like I think we got to get back to the moon and build a base there, you know, a science base. I think we could learn a lot about the nature of the universe if we have a proper science base on the moon. You know, like we have a science base in Antarctica and you know, many other parts of world. And so that that that's like I think the next big thing we've got to have like a serious like moon base and then get people to Mars and. You know, get get out there and be a space for any civilization. I'll ask you about some of those details, but since you're so busy with the hard engineering challenges of everything that's involved. Are you still able to marvel at the magic of at all of space travel of every time the rocket goes up, especially when it's a crude mission. Are you just so overwhelmed with all the challenges that you have to solve. And actually sort of to add to that the reason I wanted to ask this question of May 30th it's been some time so you can look back and think about the impact already. It's already at the time it was an engineering problem maybe now it's becoming a historic moment. Like it's a moment that how many moments will be remembered about the 21st century to me. That or something like that maybe inspiration for one of those would be remembered as the early steps of a new age of space exploration. Yeah, I mean during the launches itself. I mean, I think I think maybe some people know but a lot of people don't know is that I'm actually a chief engineer of SpaceX. So the you know, I've signed off on pretty much all the design decisions. And you know, so if there's something that goes wrong with that vehicle, it's fundamentally my fault. So so I'm really just thinking about all the things that like so. So when I see the rocket I see all the things that could go wrong and the things that could be better and the same with the dragon space craft. It's like people see, oh, this is a spacecraft or a rocket and that's looks really cool. I'm like, I've like a readout of like this is the these are the risks. These are the problems. That's what I see. Like so it's not what other people see when they see the product. So let me ask you then to analyze starship in that same way. I know you have you'll talk about in more detail about starship in the near future. Perhaps you had that. I don't know if you want. But just in that same way, like you said, you see when you see up. When you see a rocket, you see the sort of a list of risks in that same way, you said that starship is a really hard problem. So many ways I can ask this, but if you magically could solve one problem perfectly, one engineering problem perfectly, which one would it be on starship? I'm sorry on starship. So is it maybe related to the efficiency, the engine, the weight of the different components, the complexity of various things, maybe the controls of the crazy thing as the dude in the land. No, it's actually the by far the biggest thing absorbing my time is a engine production. Not the design of the engine. I have often said prototypes are easy production is hard. So we have the most advanced rocket engine that's ever been designed. The because I say currently the best rocket engine ever is probably the R.D. 180 or R.D. 170. That's the door of Russian engine basically. And and still I think an engine is generally happy if it's got something to orbit. So our engine has not gotten anything to orbit yet. But it is it's the first engine that's actually better than the Russian R.D. engines, which are amazing design. So you're talking about Raptor engine. What makes it amazing? What are the different aspects of it that make it like? What are you the most excited about if the whole thing works in terms of efficiency, all those kinds of things? Well, it's. Berraktor is a full flow staged combustion engine and it's operating at a very high chamber pressure. So one of the key figures merit perhaps the key figure of merit is what is the chamber pressure at which the rocket engine? Can operate that's the combustion chamber pressure. So Raptor is designed to operate at 300 bar possibly maybe higher than standard atmospheres. So the record right now for operational engine is the R.D. engine that I mentioned the Russian R.D. which is I believe around 267 bar. And the difficulty of the chamber pressure is increases on a non-linear basis. So 10% more chamber pressure is more like 50% more difficult. But that that chair pressure is that that is what allows you to get a very high power density for the engine. So enabling a very high thrust to weight ratio and a very high specific impulse. So specific impulse is like a measure of the efficiency of a rocket engine. It's really the the the the effective exhaust velocity of the gas coming out of the engine. So with a very high chamber pressure you can have a compact engine that nonetheless has a high expansion ratio, which is the ratio between the exit nozzle and the throat. So you know engines like you see rocket engines got like sort of like about like an hour glass shape. It's like a chamber and then it next down and there's a nozzle and the ratio of the the exit diameter to the the throat. It's an expansion ratio. So why is it such a hard engine to manufacture a scale? It's very complex. What is complexity mean here is a lot of components involved. There's a lot of a lot of components and a lot of unique materials that so we have to invent a several alloys that don't exist in order to make this engine work. And materials problem too. It's a materials problem and in a stage combustion full flow stage combustion there are there are many feedback loops in the system. So you basically you've got proponents and hot gas flowing simultaneously to so many different places on the engine. And they all have a recursive effect on each other. So you change one thing here. It has a recursive effect here. It changes something over there and and it's it's it's quite hard to control. Like there's a reason no one's made this before. But and the reason we're doing a stage combustion full flow is because it has the highest of the highest. The vehicle possible efficiency. So in in in order to make a fully reusable rocket which that that's the really the holy grail of overall rocketry. You have to have everything's got to be the best it's got to be the best engine the best airframe the best heat shield. Extremely light avionics. Very clever control mechanisms. You've got to shed mass and any possible way that you can for example we are instead of putting landing legs on the booster and ship we're going to catch them with a tower to save the weight of the landing legs. So that's like. I mean we're talking about catching the largest flying object ever made. With it on a giant tower with with tough stick arms. It's like a cruddy kid with a fly but much bigger. I mean pulling this probably won't work the first time. And so this is not this is banana stuff. So you mentioned that you doubt well not you doubt but there there's days or moments when you doubt that this is even possible. It's so difficult. The possible part is. Well at this point we'll I think we will we'll get Starship to work. There's a question of timing how long will it take us to do this. How long will it take us to actually achieve full and rapid reusability. Because it will take a probably many launches before we're able to have full and rapid reusability. But I can't say that the physics pencils out like the like we're not. Like at this point I'd say we're confident they would that sick like let's say we're I'm very confident sick success is in the set of all possible outcomes. And for set for a while there I was not convinced that success was in the set of possible outcomes. Which is very important actually. But so we're saying there's a chance. I'm saying there's a chance exactly. Just not sure how how long it will take. We have very very talented team they're working night and day to make it happen. And like like said that the critical thing to achieve for the revolution in space flight and for humanity to be a space for an civilization is to have a fully and rapidly. And so that's why we're trying to achieve a very successful rocket over rocket. There's not even been any over rocket that's been full to use will ever and this has always been the the the the the the holy grail of rocketry. And many smart people very smart people have tried to do this before and they're not succeeded. So because it's such a hard problem. In situations like this when the engineering problem is so difficult there's a lot of experts many of whom you admire who have failed in the past. Yes. And a lot of people. You know a lot of experts maybe journalists all the kind of you know the public in general have a lot of doubt about whether it's possible. And you yourself know that even if it's a non-null set non empty set of success it's still unlikely or very difficult like where do you go to both personally. Intellectually as an engineer as a team like for source of strength needed to sort of persevere through this. And to keep going with the project take it to completion. I just really know how I think about things. I mean for me it's simply this this is something that is important to get done. And we should just keep doing it or die trying. And I I don't need a source of strength. So quitting is not even like. That's not it's not my nature. And I don't. I don't know. I'm not going to do it. It's not my nature. And I don't care about optimism or pessimism. Fuck that we're going to get it done. Get it done. Can you then zoom back in to specific problems with starship or any engineer problems you work on. Can you try to introspect your particular biological neural network. You're thinking process and describe how you think through problems to different engineering and design problems. Is there like a systematic process you spoken about first principles thinking. Is there kind of process to it? Well, you know, like saying like physics is low and everything else is a recommendation. Like I've met a lot of people who can break the law but haven't met anyone who could break physics. So so first for you know any kind of technology problem you have to sort of just make sure you're not violating physics. And you know first principles analysis. I think it's something that can be applied to really any walk of life. Anything really it's just it's really just saying you know, let's let's boil something down to the most fundamental principles the things that we are most confident are true at a foundational level. And that says your at your it says to axiomatic base and then you reason up from there. And then you cross check your conclusion against the the axiomatic truth. So you know some basics and physics would be like are you fighting conservation of energy or momentum or something like that. You know, then you're just not going to work. So you know, so that's just to establish is it is it possible. And another good physics tool is thinking about things in the limit. If you if you take a particular thing and you scale to a very large number or to a very small number, how does how do things change? Well, it's like temper like in number of things you manufacture something like that and then in time. Yeah, like let's say it takes an example of like like manufacturing which I think is just a very underrated problem. And and likes it. It's much harder to take a advanced technology product and bring it into volume manufacturing that it is to design it in the first place. My or as magnitude. So so let's say you try to figure out is like why is this this a part or product expensive? Is it because of something fundamentally foolish that we're doing or is it because our volume is too low? And so they say, okay, well, what if our volume was a million years here? Is it still expensive? That's what I mean, but I think about things to the limit. If it's still expensive at a million units a year, then volume is not the reason why you think it's expensive. There's something fundamental about design. And then you then can focus on the reducing complexity or something like that and the design to change the change apart to be something that is not fundamentally expensive. But it like that's a common thing in rock tree because the the unit volume is as well as the low. And so a common excuse would be well, it's expensive because our unit volume is low. And if we were in like automotive or something like that, we'll consume electronics then our cost will be lower. And like, okay, so let's say we say now you're making a million units a year. Is this the expensive? The answer is yes. Then economies of scale are not the issue. Do you throw into manufacturing, do you throw like supply chain? Talk about resources and materials and stuff like that. Do you throw that into the calculation of trying to reason from first principles like how we're going to make this supply chain work here? Yeah. And then the cost of materials, things like that or is that too much exactly. So like another good example, like of thinking about things in the limit is if you take any any product, any machine or whatever, like take a rocket or whatever and say, if you've got, if you look at the raw materials in the rocket, so you're going to have like aluminum steel, titanium, ink and L, especially specialty alloys, copper, and you say, what are the, what's the weight of the constituent elements of each of these elements? And what is their raw material value? And that sets the asymptotic limit for how low the cost of the vehicle can be unless you change the materials. So and then when you do that, I call it like maybe the magic one number or something like that. So that would be like if you had the, you know, like just a pile of these raw materials here and you could wave the magic one and rearrange the atoms into the final shape. That would be the lowest possible cost that you could make this thing for unless you change the materials. So then and that is always a, you're almost always a very low number. So then what's actually causing these to be expensive is how you put the atoms into the desired shape. Yeah, actually, if you're mind me taking a tiny tangent, I often talk to Jim Keller, who's something to work with you. Oh, yeah, Jim was, yeah, great work at Tesla. So I suppose he carries the flame of the same kind of thinking that you're talking about now. And I guess I see that same thing at Tesla and SpaceX folks who work there, they kind of learn this way of thinking and it kind of becomes obvious almost. But anyway, I had argument, not argument. He educated me about how cheap it might be to manufacture a Tesla bot, which is, we had an argument, what is, how can you reduce the cost of scale of producing a robot? Because I got in the chance to interact quite a bit. Obviously in the academic circles with human robots and then my boss in dynamics and stuff like that. And they're very expensive to build. And then Jim kind of schooled me on saying like, okay, like this kind of first principles thinking of how can we get the cost of manufactured down. I suppose you do that, you have done that kind of thinking for Tesla bot and for all kinds of all kinds of complex systems that are traditionally seen as complex. And you say, okay, how can we simplify everything now? Yeah. I mean, I think if you are really good at manufacturing, you can basically make a high volume. You can basically make anything for a cost that asymptotically approaches the role of raw material value of the constituents, plus any intellectual property that you need to do license anything. But it's hard. It's not like that's a very hard thing to do, but it is possible for anything. Anything in volume can be made of like I said for a cost that asymptotically approaches this raw material constituents, plus intellectual property license rights. So what will happen in trying to design a product is people start with the tools and parts and methods that they're familiar with. And then and try to create the product using their existing tools and methods. The other way to think about it is actually imagine the try to imagine the platonic ideal of the perfect product or technology, whatever it might be. And so what is this? What is the perfect arrangement of atoms that would be the best possible product. And now let us try to figure out how to get the atoms in that shape. I mean, it sounds. It's almost like a Ricka Morty absurd until you start to really think about it and you really should think about it in this way because everything else is kind of. If you think you might fall victim to the momentum of the way things are done in the past, unless you think in this way. Well, just as a function of inertia, people want to use the same tools and methods that they are familiar with. They just that's what they'll do by default. And then that that will lead to an outcome of things that can be made with those tools and methods, but is unlikely to be the platonic ideal of the perfect product. So then so that's why it's good to think of things in both directions, like what can we build with the tools that we have. But then but also what is the what is the perfect the theoretical perfect product look like and that that theoretical perfect product is going to be a moving target because as you learn more. The definition of for that perfect product will change because you don't actually know what the perfect product is, but you can successfully approximate a more perfect product. So think about it like that and then saying, OK, now what tools methods materials, whatever do we need to create in order to get the atoms in that shape. But for people very rarely think about it that way. But it's a powerful tool. I should mention that the brilliant Shivon Zillos is hanging hanging out with us in case you hear a voice of wisdom from from from outside from up above. OK, so let me ask you about Mars. You mentioned it would be great for science to put a base on the moon to do some research. But the truly big leap again in this category of seemingly impossible is to put a human being on Mars. When do you think space sucks will land a human being on Mars? Best cases about five years worst case ten years. What are the determining factors would you say from an engineering perspective or is that that not the bottlenecks? I know it's fundamentally engineering the vehicle. I mean, Starship is the most complex and advanced rocket that's ever been made by. I don't know what I'm adding to you or something like that. It's a lot. It's really next level. So. And the fundamental optimization of starship is minimizing cost pretend to overt and ultimately cost pretend to the surface of Mars. This may seem like a mogen tile objective, but it is actually the thing that needs to be optimized. Like there is a certain cost pretend to the surface of Mars where we can afford to establish a self-sustaining city. And then above that, we cannot afford to do it. So right now you can fly to Mars for trillion dollars. No amount of money could get your ticket to Mars. So we need to get that above. You know, to get that like something that is actually possible at all. But then that's that's we don't want to just want to have you know with Mars flags and footprints and then not come back for a half century like with the moon. In order to pass a very important to great filter. I think we need to be a multi planet species. Let's make sound somewhat esoteric to to a lot of people, but I eventually given enough time. That's something the Earth is likely to experience some calamity that could be something that humans do to themselves or an external event like happen to the dinosaurs. And but a bit of you know eventually and if not if not if not that happens and somehow magically we we keep going. Then the Sun will the Sun is gradually expanding and will engulf the Earth and probably Earth gets too hot for. Life in about 500 million years so long time but that's only 10% longer than Earth has been around. And so if you think about like the current situation is really remarkable and kind of hard to believe but. Earth's been around 4.5 billion years and this is the first time in 4.5 billion years that it's been possible to extend life beyond Earth. And that window of charity may be open for a long time and I hope it is but it also may be open for a short time and we should I think it is wise for us to. Act quickly while the video is open just in case it closes. The existence of nuclear weapons pandemics all kinds of threats should kind of give us some motivation. I mean civilization could get. Could die with a bang or a whimper you know if it's a if it dies of demographic collapse then it's more of a whimper obviously. But it if it's World War three is more of a bang but but these are all risks. I mean it's important to think these things and just you know things things like probabilities not certain. Those are probability that something bad will happen on Earth. I think most likely the future will be good. But there's like let's say for arguments sake at 1% chance per century of a civilization ending event like that was Stephen Hawking's estimate. I think he might be right about that. So then you know we should basically think of this like being a multi-plant species is like taking out insurance for life itself like life insurance for life. So turn into an informational quick life insurance for life. Yes. And you know we can bring the the creatures from you know plants animals from Earth to Mars and breathe life into the planet. And and have a second planet with with life that would be great. They can't bring themselves there you know so if we don't bring them to Mars then they will just for sure will die when the sun expands anyway and then that'll be it. What do you think is the most difficult aspect of building civilization on Mars? Terraforming Mars like from an engineering perspective from a financial perspective human perspective to get to get a large number of folks there who will never return back to Earth. No I think it's what they returned some will return back to it. They will choose to stay there for the rest of their lives. Yeah many will. But you know we need the spaceships back like the ones that go to Mars we don't back so you can hop on if you want you know it's like we can't just not have the space ships come back with those things are expensive we need to come back to come back and turn the trip. I mean do you think about the terraforming aspect like actually building are you so focused right now on the spaceships part that's so critical to get to Mars. We absolutely if you can't get there nothing else matters so and like said you you can't get there with at some extraordinarily high cost I mean the current cost of let's say one ton to the surface of Mars is on the order of a billion dollars. So because you don't just need the rocket and the launch and everything you need like heat shield you need you know guidance system you need deep space communications you need some kind of landing system. So like rough approximation would be a billion dollars per ton to the surface of Mars right now this is obviously way too expensive to create a self-sustaining civilization. So we need to improve that by at least a factor of a thousand a million per ton. Yes ideally less than much less than a million ton but if it's not like it's got to be. You have to like what well how much can society afford to spend or want to just want to spend on a self-sustaining city on Mars the self-sustaining part is important like it's just the key threshold. The great filter will have been passed when the city on Mars it can survive even if the space shifts from a stop coming for any reason which doesn't matter what the reason is but if they stop coming for any reason will it die out or will it not and if there's even one critical ingredient missing then it still doesn't count. It's like you know if you're a long sea voyage and you've got everything except vitamin C it's not a matter of time you know you're going to die. So we're going to get Mars a Mars city to the point where it's self-sustaining. I'm not sure this will really happen in my lifetime but I hope to see at least have a lot of momentum and then you can say what is the minimum tonnage necessary to have a self-sustaining city. And there's a lot of uncertainty about this you can say like I don't know it's probably at least a million tons. Because you have to set up a lot of infrastructure on Mars like said you can't be missing any anything that in order to be self-sustaining can't be missing like you need you know a semiconductor fabs you need iron ore or fine raising like you need lots of things you know so. And Mars is not super hospitable it's the least inhospitable planet but it's definitely a fixer of a planet. So it's not that of earth. Yes earth is pretty good. Earth is like easy. And also we should clarify in the solar system. Yes in the solar system. There might be nice like vacation spots. There might be some great planets out there but it's hopeless to get there. Yeah way way way way too hard to say the least. Let me push back on that not really push back but a quick curve ball of a question. So this is the first starting point so general relativity allows for warm holes. They technically can exist do you think those can ever be leveraged by humans to travel fast in this be light. Well are you saying that's the most possible thing is is debatable the. We currently do not know of any means of going fast in the speed of light. There is like. Like there are some ideas about having space like so so. You're going to let move at the speed of light through space but. If you can make space itself move that that's like that that's a really warming space space is capable of moving fast in the speed of light. Right like the universe in the big bang universe the universe expanded it much much more than the speed of light by a lot. Yeah so. But the. If this is possible the the amount of energy required to off space is so. Gigantic it's boggles the mind. So all the work you've done with propulsion how much innovation is possible with rocket propulsion is this. I mean you've seen it all and you're constantly invading on every aspect. How much is possible like how much can you get 10X somehow is there something in there in physics that you can get significant improvement in terms of efficiency of engines and all those kinds of things. Well as I was saying like the really the holy grail is a fully and rapidly reusable orbital system. So right now the Falcon 9 is the only reusable rocket out there. But the booster comes back in land so you've seen the videos and we get the nose cone or faring back but we do not get the upper stage back. So that means that we have a minimum cost of building an upper stage. You can think of like a two stage rocket of sort of like two airplanes like a big airplane and a smaller plane. And we get the bigger plane back with another smaller airplane and so it's still cost a lot you know so that upper stage is you know at least $10 million. And then the degree of the booster is not as reuse is not as rapidly and completely reusable as we'd like in order the fairings. So you know our kind of minimum marginal cost not counting overhead for per flight is on the order of 15 to $20 million maybe. So that's extremely good for it's by far better than any rocket ever in history. But with full and rapid reusability we can reduce the cost per ton to orbit by a factor of 100. But just think of it like imagine if you had an aircraft or something or a car. And if you had to buy a new car every time you went for a drive, it would be very expensive every silly frankly. But but you in fact you just refuel the car or recharge the car and that's makes your trip like I don't know a thousand times cheaper. So it's the same for rockets. If you are very difficult to make this complex machine that can go to orbit and so if you cannot reuse it and have to throw even any part of any significant part of it away that massively increases the cost. So you know Starship and theory could do a cost per launch of like a million maybe two million dollars or something like that. And put over a hundred tons of orbit. This is crazy. So that's incredible. So you're saying like it's by far the biggest bang for the box is to make it fully reusable versus like some kind of brilliant breakthrough into your actual physics. No, no, there's no there's no brilliant break now. There's no. Just make you want to make the rocket reusable. This is an extremely difficult entering problem. Got it. No new physics is required. Just brilliant engineering. Let me ask a slightly philosophical fun question. Gotta ask. I know you're focused on getting to Mars, but once we're there on Mars, what do you what form of government economic system? Political system. Do you think would work best for an early civilization of humans? I mean, the interesting reason to talk about the stuff, it also helps people dream about the future. I know you're really focused about the short term engineering dream, but it's like, I don't know, there's something about imagining an actual civilization on Mars that gives people, it really gives people hope. Well, it would be a new frontier and an opportunity to rethink the whole nature of government. I just as was done in the creation of the United States. So, I mean, I would suggest having direct democracy, like people vote directly on things as opposed to representative democracy. Representative democracy, I think, is to subject to special interests and a coercion of the politicians and that kind of thing. So, I'd recommend that there's just direct democracy, people vote on laws, the population votes on laws themselves. And then the laws must be short enough that people can understand them. Yeah, and then keeping a well informed populist, like really being transparent about all the information about what they're voting for. Yeah, absolutely transparency. And not make it as annoying as those cookies we have to accept the truth. Except cookies. It's like a slight amount of trepidation when you click except cookies. I feel as though there's like perhaps like a very tiny chance that'll open a portal to hell or something like that. Exactly. Why do they? Why do they keep wanting me to accept the what do they want with this cookie? Like somebody got upset with accepting cookies or something somewhere, I mean, who cares? Like, so annoying to keep accepting all these cookies. Me. Yes, you can have my damn cookie. I don't care. Whatever. He heard it from me on first. He accepts all of your damn cookies. Yeah. It's all asking me. It's annoying. Yeah, it's one example of implementation of a good idea done really horribly. Yeah, somebody who has some good intentions of like privacy or whatever. But now everyone just has to accept cookies. And it's not, you know, you have billions of people who have to keep clicking except cookie and super annoying. Then we just accept the damn cookie. It's fine. There is like, I think a fundamental problem that we're because we've not really had a major like a World War or something like that. And while obviously we would like to not have hold was there's not been a cleansing function for rules and regulations. So what was did have some sort of lining in that there would be a reset on rules and regulations after a war. So all those wanted to there were huge resets on rules and regulations. Now as if society society does not have a war that and there's no cleansing function or garbage collection for rules and regulations. Then rules and regulations will accumulate every year because they're immortal. There's no actual humans die, but the lowest owned. So that we need a garbage collection function for rules and regulations that should not just be immortal. Because some of the rules and regulations that are put in place will be counterproductive. Done with good intentions, but counterproductive. Sometimes not done with good intentions. So if you just if rules and regulations is to accumulate every year and you get more and more of them, then eventually you won't be able to do anything. You just like go live with, you know, tie down by thousands of little strings. And we see that in, you know, US and like basically all economies that have been around for a while and regulators and legislators create new rules and regulations every year. But they don't put effort into removing them. And I think that's very important that we put effort into removing rules and regulations. But it gets tough because you get special interests that then are dependent on like they they have a, you know, a vested interest in that whatever rule and regulation and that they then they fight to not get it removed. Yeah, so it I mean, I guess the problem with the Constitution is it's it's kind of like C versus Java because it doesn't have any garbage collection built in. When you first said that the the metaphor of garbage collection, I love it. Codex Appoint. For the codex, they're way. Yeah, it would be interesting. Interesting is the laws themselves kind of had a built-in thing where they kind of die after a while. And somebody explicitly publicly defends them. Yeah. So that's sort of it's not like somebody has to kill them. They kind of die themselves. They disappear. Yeah. Not the defend Java or anything, but you know, C++, you know, you could also have great garbage collection and Python and so on. Yeah. So yeah, something needs to happen or just the civilizations are these are just hard and over time. And and you can just get less and less done because there's just a rule against everything. So so I think like I don't know for Mars order, I say, I will be for you. Obviously for Earth as well. Like I think there should be an active process for removing a rules and regulations and questioning their existence. Just like if we've got a function for creating rules and regulations because rules and regulations can also think of like they're like software or lines of code for operating civilization. That's the rules and regulations. So it's like we shouldn't have rules regulations, but you have code accumulation, but no code removal. And so it just gets to become basically archaic blood wear after a while. And then it's just it makes it hard for things to progress. So I don't know maybe Mars, you have like an any given law must have a sunset. And and and require active voting to keep restored to keep it up there. And I actually also say like and these just I don't know recommendations or thoughts. Ultimately will be up to the people on Mars to decide, but I think it should be easier to remove a law than to add one because of the just to overcome the inertia of laws. So maybe it's like a. For argument sake, you need like say 60% vote to have a law take effect, but only a 40% vote to remove it. So let me be the guy you posted me on Twitter recently where there's this like a row of journals. A guy just walks all the way across. Sure. Yeah. And he tells you about crypto. So I mean, that's how to be so many times. I think maybe even literally. Yeah. Do you think technologically speaking there's any room for ideas of smart contracts that are so on because you mentioned laws. That's an interesting implement use of things like smart contracts to implement the laws by which government's function. Like something built on a theory or maybe a dog coin that enables smart contracts somehow. And I'm quite understand this whole small contracting. I mean, I'm too downtown to have small contracts. That's a good line. I mean, my general approach to any kind of like deal or whatever is just make sure there's clarity of understanding. That's the most important thing. And just keep any kind of deal very very short and simple plain language. And just make sure everyone understands this is the deal. Everyone is it clear? And what are the consequences if various things don't happen? But usually deals are business deals or whatever are a way too long and complex and overly layered and pointlessly. You mentioned that Doge is the people's coin. And you said that you were literally going SpaceX may consider literally putting a Doge coin on the moon. Is this something you're still considering Mars perhaps? Do you think there's some chance we've talked about political systems on Mars that Doge coin is the official currency of Mars that's happening in the future? Well, I think Mars itself will need to have a different currency because you can't synchronize due to speed of light. Or not easily. So must be completely standalone for Mars? Well, yeah, because Mars is at closest approach. It's four light minutes away roughly and then at first approach, it's roughly 20 light minutes away. Maybe a little more. So you can't really have something synchronizing. If you've got a 20 minutes to be light issue, if it's got a one minute blockchain, it's not going to synchronize probably. So Mars would, I don't know if Mars would have a cryptocurrency as a thing, but probably seems likely. But it would be some kind of localized thing on Mars. And you let the people decide? Absolutely. The future of Mars should be up to the motions. Yeah, so. I think the cryptocurrency thing is an interesting approach to reducing the. Error in the database that is called money. I think I have a pretty deep understanding of what money actually is on a practical day to day basis because of PayPal. We really got in deep there. And right now the money system actually for practical purposes is really a bunch of heterogeneous mainframes running old cobalt. Okay, you mean literally that's literally literally what's happening in batch mode. Okay, in batch mode. Yeah, I put either for fastest you have to maintain that code. Okay, that's a pain that's pain. Not even for trans cobalt. It's cobalt. And they still banks are still buying mainframes in 2021 and running ancient cobalt code. And the federal service is like probably even older than what the banks have and they have an old cobalt mainframe. And so now that and so the government effectively has editing privileges on the money database. And they use those editing privileges to make more money whenever they want. And this increases the error in the database that is money. I think money should really be viewed through the lens of information theory. And so it's you're kind of like an internet connection. Like what's the bandwidth, you know, total but rate. What is the latency, jutter, packet drop, you know, errors in errors in network communication. She's thinking money like that basically. I think that's probably right where you think that. And then say what what system. From information theory standpoint allows an economy to function the best. And you know, crypto is an attempt to reduce the the error in. In in money that is contributed by governments. Deluting the money supply as basically a pernicious for pernicious form of taxation. So both policy in terms of with inflation and actual like technological cobalt like cryptocurrency takes us into the 21st century in terms of the actual systems that allow you to do the transaction to store wealth all those kinds of things. Like I said, just think of money as information people often will think of money as having power in and of itself. It does not money is information and it does not have power in and of itself. Like you're going to applying the physics tools of thinking about things in the limit is helpful. If you are stranded on a tropical island and you have a trillion dollars useless. Because there's no there's no resource allocation money is a database resource allocation. But there's no resource to allocate except for self so money is useless. If you're stranded on desert island with no food you'd all the Bitcoin in the world will not stop you from starving. So. So like just just think of money as as a database for resource allocation across time and space. And then what what system is what what what in what form should that that database what data system. What what would be most effective now that there's a there is a fundamental issue with say Bitcoin is kind of form in that it's the transaction volume is very limited. The latency it's the latency for for probably confirmed transaction is too long much longer than you'd like. So it's not it's actually not great from transaction willing standpoint or latency standpoint. So it is perhaps useful as as to search to solve an aspect of the money database problem. Which is the sort of store of wealth or an in accounting of relative obligations I suppose. But it is not useful as a currency as a day to day currency. The people have proposed different technological solutions like lightning lightning network and the layer two technologies on top of that. I mean it's it's all it seems to be all kind of a trade off. But the point is it's kind of brilliant to say that just think about information think about what kind of database what kind of infrastructure enables. Yeah, I'm afraid in economy. And you need to have some thing that it allows for the efficient to have efficient value ratios between products and services. So you got this massive number of products and services and you need to you can't just barter barter. It's like that would be extremely unwieldy. So you need something that gives you the ratio of exchange between goods and services. And and then I just something that allows you to shift obligations across time like debt, debt and equity, shift obligations across time. Then what does what does the best job of that? Part of the reason why I think there's some merit to doge coin even though it was obviously created as a joke. Is that it actually does have a much higher transaction volume capability than Bitcoin. And the you know the cost of doing a transaction the the doge coin fee is very low. Like right now if you want to do it, but coin transaction the price of doing that transaction is very high. So you could not use it effectively for most things. And nor could it even scale to high volume. And when Bitcoin was you know started, I guess one around 2008 or something like that. The internet connections were much worse than the RJ like order of magnitude. I mean there's the way way worse in 2008. So like having a small block size or whatever is and along synchronization time is made sense in 2008. But to you know 2021 or fast forward 10 years it's like it's like comically low. You know it's so. And I think there's some value to having a linear increase in the amount of currency that is generated. So because some amount of the currency like if a currency is too deflationary or like or should say if if a currency is expected to increase in value of time. Or reluctance to spend it. Because they like if I I'll just hold it not spend it because it's scarcity is increasing with time. So if I spend it now then I will regret spending it. So I will just you know, total it. But if there's some delusion of the currency occurring over time that's that's more of an incentive to use it as a currency. Just a fixed number of sort of coins or hash strings that are generated every year. So there's some inflation but it's not a percentage base. It's so that the it's a fixed number. So the percentage of inflation will necessarily decline over time. So it just I don't I'm not saying that it's like the ideal system for a currency but I think it actually is just fundamentally better than anything else I've seen just by accident. I like I said around 2008. So you're not you know some people suggested you might be said to ocean of commoto you previously said you're not I'm not you're not for sure. Would you tell us if you were yes okay. Do you think it's a feature bug that he's anonymous or she or they. It's an interesting kind of quirk of human history that there is a particular technology that is a completely anonymous inventor. Or creator. Well you can you can look at the evolution of ideas. Before the launch of Bitcoin and see who wrote. You know about those ideas. And then I like I don't know exactly I don't know who created but but coin for practical purposes but the evolution of ideas is pretty clear for that and. I can see him as though like Nick Savo is probably more than anyone else responsible for the evolution of those ideas. So he claims not to be so cut so not commoto but I'm not sure that's does neither here nor there but he seems to be the one more responsible for the ideas behind but quite anyone else. So it's not perhaps like singular figures aren't even as important as the figures involved in the evolution of ideas that let go thing so yeah you know most perhaps it's sad to think about history but maybe most names will be forgotten anyway. So name name attached to an idea. What does it mean really I think Shakespeare had a thing about roses and stuff whatever he said rose by any other name it's all sweet. I got you on the quote Shakespeare I feel I feel like I can't for something today show like a belly to a summer's day. I'm going to clip that out. No more tempered animal fair. Autopilot test a lot of. Does the autopilot has been through an incredible journey over the past six years or perhaps even longer in the minds of in your mind in the minds of many involved. I think that's where we first like connected really with the autopilot stuff autonomy and what's the whole journey was incredible to me to watch I was. I knew well part of it I was at MIT and I knew the difficulty of computer vision and I knew the whole I had a lot of colleagues and friends about the DARPA challenge and you how difficult it is so there was a natural skepticism when I first drove a Tesla with the initial system based on mobile I. I thought there's no way. So first one I got in I thought there's no way this car could maintain. Like staying in lane and create a comfortable experience so my intuition initially was that the lane keeping problem is way too difficult to solve. Oh, thank you. Yeah, that's really easy. But like but not the what's solved in the way that we just we talked about previous is prototype versus a thing that actually creates a pleasant experience over hundreds of thousands of miles. I yeah, so we have to wrap a lot of code around the mobile I think it doesn't just work by itself. I mean that there's part that's part of the story of how you approach things sometimes sometimes you do things from scratch sometimes the first you kind of see what's out there and then you decide different scratch that was one of the boldest decisions I've seen is both on the hardware and the software to decide to eventually go from scratch. I thought again I was skeptical whether that's going to be able to work out because it's such a such a difficult problem. So it was an incredible journey what I see now with everything the hardware the compute the sensors the things I may be caring level about most is the the stuff that Andre Carpati is leading with the data set selection the whole data engine process then you'll network architectures the way that's in the real world that network is tested validated all the different test sets. versus the image net model of computer vision like what's in academia is like real world artificial intelligence so I'm under is also and I was to place an important role but we have a lot of really talented people driving things so. And a show is actually the head of auto pilot engineering Andre is director of AI AI stuff yeah so yeah there's I'm aware that there's an incredible team of just a lot going on yeah just a you know I feel people people will give I will give me too much credit and they'll give Andre too much credit so. And people should realize how much is going on under the yeah just a lot of really talented people the tells the autopilot the IT is extremely talented it's like some of the smart people in the world so yeah we're getting it done what what are some insights you've gained over those five six years of autopilot about the problem of autonomous driving so you leap then having some sort of. First principles kinds of intuitions but nobody knows how difficult the the problem like I thought the self-driving problem would be hard but it was harder than I thought it would be easy I thought it very hard but it was actually way harder than than even that so. I work comes down to you at the day is the soul self driving you have to solve. You have you basically need to recreate what you what humans do to drive which is humans drive with optical sensors eyes and biological neural net. And so in order to that that's how the entire road system is designed to work with with a basically passive optical and neural net. It biologically and now that we need to so for actually for full self driving to work we have to recreate that in digital form. So we have to that that means cameras with advanced neural nets in silicon form and then you will obviously solve for full self driving that's the only way I don't think there's any other way. But the question is what aspects of human nature do you have to encode into the machine right so you have to solve the perception problem like detect. And then you first of all realize what is the perception problem for driving like all the kinds of things you have to be able to see like what what do we even look at when we drive there's a I just recently heard Andre talked about at MIT about like car doors I think it was the world's greatest talk of all time about car doors. The you know the fine details of car doors like what what is even an open car door man so like the the ontology of that that's the perception problem we human solve that perception problem and Tesla has to solve that problem and then there's the control and the planning couple with the perception yet to figure out like what's involved in driving like especially in all the different edge cases. And then I mean maybe you can comment on this how much game the reddit kind of stuff needs to be involved you know at a four way stop sign you know are as humans when we drive our actions affect the world like it changes how others behave most of time was driving if you you're usually just responding to the scene as opposed to like really. And then you know I think I think I think I think these could be sort of control control logic can under them so not not the hot part the you know let's see what do you think is the hard part in this whole beautiful complex problem so it's a lot of freaking software man a lot of smart lines of code. For sure in order to have create an accurate vector space so like you're you're coming from image space which is like this this flow of photons cut your going to camera cameras and. And then you have this massive boot stream image space and then you have to effectively compress the massive but stream corresponding to photons that knocked off an electron camera sensor and turn that but stream into into vector space. I like by vector space I mean like you've got cars and humans and lane lines and curves and traffic lights and that kind of thing what once you have an accurate vector space the control problem is so much that of a video game like a grand theft order of cyberpunk. If you have accurate accurate vector space it's the control wrong is it's it's it's it's trivial it's not trivial but it's like it's it's it's it's not like some insurmountable thing it's so it's but having an accurate vector space is very difficult yeah I think we humans don't give enough respect the concredible human perception system is the mapping the raw photons to the vector space representation and I think that's the most important thing is that we're going to have a lot of time to talk about the real thing. So you're brain is doing an incredible amount of processing and giving you an image that is a very clean up image like when we look around here we seek like you see color in the corners of your eyes but actually your eyes have very few cones like a corner scepter is in the peripheral vision your eyes are painting color in the peripheral vision you don't realize it but their eyes are actually painting color and your eyes also have like this blood vessels and also to gnarly things. And there's a blind spot but do you see your blind spot no you're your brain is painting in the missing the blind spot you can do these like these things online where you look look here and look at this point and then look at this point and it's if it's in your blind spot it your brain will just fill in the missing vessel the peripheral vision circle yeah to realize all the illusions for vision science and so it makes you realize just how incredible the brain is the brain is doing crazy amount of post processing on the vision signals for your eyes it's insane. So and then and even once you get all those vision signals your brain is constantly trying to figure to forget as much as possible. So human memory is perhaps the weakest thing about the brain is memory. So because memory is so expensive to a brain and so limited your brain is trying to forget as much as possible and to still the things that you see in the brain is not still the things that you see into the smallest the smallest amounts of information possible so brain is trying to not just get to a vector space but get to a vector space that is the smallest possible vector space of only relevant objects. And I think like you can sort of look inside your brain or at least I can like when you drive down the road and try to think about what your brain is actually doing consciously and it's it's it's it's it's like you'll see a card that's because you're you're you're not have cameras you don't have eyes in the back of your head on the side you know so you say like but you're you're basically your head is like a you know it's basically like two cameras on the slow gimbal. And what's you and I said something great. Okay, here and I's up, you know, like and people constantly distracted and thinking about things and texting and doing also things they shouldn't do in a car changing the radio station. So having arguments, you know, it's like so so then like say like like when's the last time you look right and left and you know or and and and railroad or even diagonally you know forward to actually refresh your vector space. So you're glancing around and what you're mind is doing is is trying to still the relevant vectors basically objects with a position and motion. And and and and then editing that down to the least amount that's necessary for you to drive. It does seem to be able to edit it down or compressive even further into things that concept. So it's not it's like it goes beyond the human mind seems to go sometimes beyond vector space. To sort of space of concepts to where you you'll see a thing it's no longer represented spatially somehow it's almost like a concept that you should be aware of. Like if this is a school zone you'll remember that as a concept which is a weird thing to represent but perhaps for driving you don't need to fully represent those things or maybe you get those kind of well you interact with you. It's like a established vector space and then actually have predictions for that those vector spaces so like you know like if you drive fast say a bus and you see that this this people before you drove past the bus you saw people crossing it's like or some just imagine there's like a large truck or something blocking site. But you before you came up to truck you saw that there were some kids about to cross the road in front of the truck now you can see the kids but you need to be able but you would now know okay those kids are probably going to pass by the truck and cross the road even though you cannot see them. So you have to have memory you have to need to remember that there were kids there and you need to have some forward prediction of what their position will be. It's a really hard problem. So with occlusions and computer vision when you can't see an object anymore even when it just walks behind a tree and reappears that's a really really I mean at least in academic literature it's tracking through occlusions it's very difficult. Yeah we're doing it. I understand this. Yeah so some of it it's like object predominance like the same thing happens with the humans with neural nets like when like a toddler grows up like there's a there's a point in time where they develop they have a sense of object permanence so before a certain age if you have a bowl or toy or whatever and you put it behind your back and you pop it out if they don't before they have object permanence it's like a new thing every time it's like whoa this toy went boof just spared and now it's back again and they can't believe it and that they can play peekaboo all day long because the peekaboo is fresh every time. But then we forgot object permanence then they realize oh no the object is not gone it's just behind your back. Sometimes I wish we never did figure out object permanence. Yeah so that's a that's an important problem to solve. Yes so an important evolution of the neural nets in the car is memory across both time and space. So you can't remember like you have to say like how long do you want to remember things for and it there's a cost to remembering things for a long time so you can you like run out of memory to try to remember too much for too long and then you also have things that are stale if they're from remember for too long and then you also need things that are remembered over time so even if you like say have like for a gun say five seconds of memory on a time basis but like let's say you you're parked at a light and you and you saw you used a pedestrian example that people were waiting to cross the cross the road and you can't you can't quite see them because I'm an occlusion but they might wait for a minute before the light changes for them to cross the road. So you still need to remember that that that's where they were and that they're probably going to cross road type of thing so even if that exceeds your your time based memory should not exceed your space memory. And I just think the data engine side of that so getting the data to learn all of the concepts that you're going to know is an incredible process it's this iterative process of just this this hydrant of many I should know. We're changing the name to something else. Okay I'm sure it'll be equally as Rick and Morty like. There's a lot of that. Yeah. We've we architected the neural net neural nets in the cars so many times it's crazy. Also every time there's a new major version you'll rename it to something more ridiculous or. I remember a bull and beautiful sorry now ridiculous of course. If you see the full the full like array of neural nets that operating in the car it's kind of boggles the mind. There's so there's so many layers it's crazy. So yeah. But and we we started off with a simple neural nets that were basically image recognition on a single frame from a single camera. And then trying to net those together with it you know it with the C. I should say we were really primarily running C here because C++ is a two-show overhead and we have our own C compiler. So to get maximum performance we actually wrote wrote our own C compiler and are continuing to optimize our C compiler for maximum efficiency. In fact we've just recently done a new river on a on a C compiler that will compile directly to our autopilot hardware. So you want to compile the whole thing down and with your own compiler. Yeah. So efficiency here because there's all kinds of compute there's CPU GPU there's like the basic types of things that you have to somehow figure out the scheduling across all of those things. And so you're compiling the code down. Yeah. So that's why there's a lot of people involved. There's a lot of hardcore software engineering at a very sort of bare metal level because you we're trying to do a lot of compute that's constrained to the full self driving computer. So we want to try to have the highest frames per second possible in a sort of very finite amount of compute and power. So we really put a lot of effort into the efficiency of our compute. So there's actually a lot of work done by some very talented software engineers at Tesla that at a very foundational level to improve the efficiency of compute and how we use the the trip accelerators, which are basically like a Brazilian dot products. It's like what what what a neural sense it's like compute wise like 99% dot products. So you know, and you want to achieve as many high frame rates like video game you want. Yeah, full resolution. High frame rate. High frame rate low latency. Low jitter. So I think one of the things we're moving towards now is no post processing of the image through the image signal processor. So like for what happens for cameras is that almost all cameras is they. There's a lot of post processing done in order to make pictures look pretty. And so we don't care about pictures looking pretty. We just want the data. So we're moving to just roll, roll photon counts. So the system will like the image that that the computer sees is actually much more than what each see if you represented on a camera. But much more data. And even in very low light conditions, you can see that there's a small photon count difference between you know the spot here and that's about there, which means that so it can see in the dark incredibly well. Because it can detect these tiny differences in photon counts. That's much better than you would possibly imagine. And then we also save 13 milliseconds on a latency. So. Firm removing the post processing and the image. Yes. It's like. Because we've got eight cameras and then there's. Roughly, I don't know, one half milliseconds or so. Maybe 1.6 milliseconds of latency. For each camera. And so like. Going to just. Basically bypassing the image processor gets us back 13 milliseconds of latency, which is important. And we track latency all the way from you know photon hits the camera to you know all the steps that it's going to go through to get you go through the. The various neural nets and the the C code and. And there's a little bit of C++ there as well. Well, I can maybe a lot, but it the core stuff is heavy duty computer. So, and see. And so we track that latency all the way to an output command to the. Driving it to accelerate the breaks us to slow down. Steering your turn left or right. So because you got to output a command that's going to go to controller and like some of these controllers have an update frequency that's maybe 10 hertz or something like that, which is slow. That's like now you lose 100 milliseconds potentially. So. So then we want to update the. The drivers on the like say, stirring and breaking control to have. More like a 100 hertz instead of 10 hertz and you got a 10 millisecond latency instead of 100 milliseconds worst case latency. And actually, jitter is more of a challenge than than latency because latency is like you can you can you can. Test paid predict, but if you. But if you've got a stack up of things going from the camera to the computer through then a series of other computers and finally to an actuator on the car. If you have a stack up of. Of tolerances of timing tolerances, then you can have quite a variable latency, which is called jitter. And that makes it. So it's hard to anticipate exactly what how you should turn the car accelerate because you know if you got maybe 150 to our milliseconds of jitter, then you could be off by. You know, after point two seconds. This can make a big difference. So you have to interpolate somehow to do with the effects of jitter. So you can make like robust control decisions. So the jitter is in the sensor information or is it the jitter can occur at any stage in the pipeline. You can if you have just if you have fixed latency, you can anticipate. And and like say, OK, we know that our information is for argument sake 150 milliseconds, sale. So for 150, 150 milliseconds from photon second camera to where you can measure a change in the acceleration of the vehicle. So then then you can say, OK, well, we're going to enter. We know it's not a 50 milliseconds. So we're going to take that into account and. And compensation for that latency. However, if you got then 150 milliseconds of latency plus 100 milliseconds of jitter, that's which could be anywhere from zero to 100 milliseconds on top. So so then your latency could be from 150 to 50 milliseconds. Now you got 100 milliseconds that you don't know what to do with. And that's basically random. So getting rid of jitter is extremely important. And that affects your control decisions and all those kinds of things. OK. Yeah, the car is just going to fundamentally maneuver better with lower jitter. And the cause will maneuver with superhuman ability and reaction time much faster than a human. I mean, I think over time, the autopilot full self driving will be capable of maneuvers that, you know, you know, are far more than what like James Bond could do in like the best movie. That's exactly where I was imagining in my mind as you said it. It's like an impossible maneuver that a human couldn't do, you know. Well, let me ask sort of looking back the six years looking out into the future based on your current understanding. How hard do you think this this full self driving problem? When do you think Tesla will solve level four FSD? I mean, it's looking quite likely that it will be next year. And what does the solution look like? Is it the current pool of FSD beta candidates? They start getting greater and greater as they have been degrees of autonomy. And then there's a certain level beyond which they can they can do their own. They can read a book. Yeah, so I mean, you can see that anybody who's been following the full self driving beta closely will see that the rate of disengagement has been dropping rapidly. So like a disengagement beware, where the driver intervenes to prevent the car from doing something dangerous potentially. So, so the interventions, you know, per a million miles has been dropping dramatically at some point. And that trend looks like it happens next year is that the probability of an accident on FSD is less than that of the average human. And then and then significantly less than that of the average human. So it's only appears like we will get there next year. Then of course, that then there's going to be a case of okay, we're not have to prove this to regulators and prove it to you know and we we want to standard that is not just equivalent to a human but much better than the average human. I think it's got to be at least two or three times higher safety than a human. So two or three times lower probability of injury than a human before before we would actually say like okay, it's okay to go. It's not going to be a cool. It's going to be much better. So if you look at 10 point FSD 10.6 just came out recently 10.7s on the way maybe 11 is on the way so we're in the future. Yeah, we were hoping to get 11 out this year, but it's a 11 actually has a whole bunch of fundamental rewrites on the neural neural network texture. And some fundamental improvements in creating vector space. So there is some fundamental leap that really deserves the 11. I mean, that's a pretty cool number. Yeah. 11 would be a single stack for all one stack to rule them all. And but they're just some really fundamental neural network texture changes that are that will allow for much more capability but you know at first they're going to have issues. So like we have this working on like sort of alpha software and it's good, but it's it's basically taking a whole bunch of C C++ code and leading a massive amount of C++ code and replacing it with the neural net. And you know, Andre makes this point a lot, which is like neural net's a kind of eating software. You know, over time there's like less and less conventional software more and more neural net. We're just a software, but it's still comes out to line the software, but let's more neural net stuff and less. You know, heuristic basically. If you're more, more, more, more matrix based stuff, unless heuristic space stuff. And you know, like, like one of the big changes will be like right now the neural nets will. Deliver a giant bag of points to the C++ or C and C++ code. We call it the giant bag of points. And it's like so you go to pixel and and and something associated with that pixel like this pixel is probably car. The pixel is probably lane line. Then you've got to assemble this giant bag of points in the C code and turn it into vectors. And it does a pretty good job of it, but it's it's a it's we want to just we need another layer of neural nets on top of that to take the giant bag of points and distill that down to vector space in the neural net part of the software as opposed to the heuristics part of the software. This is a big improvement. Neural nets all the way down. So you want it. It's not even neural neural net, but it's it's it's this will be just a get this is a game changer to not have the bag of points and the giant bag of points that has to be assembled with many lines of C++. And and have the and have a neural net just assemble those into a vector. So so that the neural net is outputting. Much much less data. It's it's it's out putting this. This is a lane line. This is a curb. This is a drivable space. This is a car. This is a you know a pedestrian or cyclist or something like that. It's out putting. It's really out putting proper proper vectors to the the C++ control control code as opposed to the sort of constructing the vectors ends in C. We've done I think quite a good job of but it's it's a it grew kind of hitting a local maximum on the how well does he can do this. So this is this is really this is really a big deal. And and just all of the networks in the car need need to move to surround video. This little some legacy networks that are not surround video. And all of the training needs to move to surround video and the efficiency of the training needs to get better and it is. And then we need to move everything to raw. Photon counts as opposed to process images. Yeah. So it's just quite a big reset on the training because the system is trained on post process image images. So we need to redo all the training. To train against the role photo accounts instead of the post process image. So ultimately it's kind of reducing the complexity of the whole thing. So reducing reducing lines of code will actually go lower. Yeah, that's fascinating. So you're doing fusion of all the sensors reducing the complexity of having to deal with these cameras. So cameras really right. Yes. Same with humans. Yeah. Well, I guess we got ears too. Okay. Yeah. Well, we'll actually need to incorporate sound as well. Because you know, you need like listen for ambulance siren so far. You know, fire trucks. You know, if somebody like, you know, yelling at you or something. I don't just that there's a little bit of audio that needs to be incorporated as well. Do you need to go back to break? Yeah, we listen to sure. Let's take a break. Okay. Honestly, frankly, like the ideas are the easy thing and the implementation is the hot thing. Like the idea of going to the moon is the easy part. But going to the moon is the hot part. And there's a lot of like hardcore engineering that's going to get done at the hardware and software level. Like it optimizing the sea compiler and just, you know, cutting out latency everywhere. Like this is. We don't do this assistant. We're not worth probably. So the work of the engineers doing this. They are like the unsigned heroes. So, you know, but they are critical to the success of the situation. I think you made it clear. I mean, at least to me, it's super exciting. Everything's going on outside of what Andre is doing. Yeah. Just the whole infrastructure, the software. I mean, everything is going on with data engine, whatever, whatever it's called. The whole process is just one part of this. The sheer scale of it is bogus mind. Like the training amount of work done with like we've written all this custom software for training and labeling. And to do auto labeling auto labeling is essential. Because especially when you got like surround video, it's very difficult to like label surround video from scratch is extremely difficult. Like take a human's such a long time to even label one video clip, like several hours or the order label it. Basically, we just apply a heavy duty like a lot of compute to the video clips to pre-assign and guess what all the things are that are going on in this surround video. And then there's like correcting it. Then all the human has to just like tweet, like say, the, you know, just adjust what is incorrect. This is like increased increases productivity by effect 100 or more. Yeah. So you've presented Tesla bot as primarily useful in the factory. First of all, I think human robots are incredible from a fan of robotics. I think the elusive movement that human, the human robots that by Peter robots show are just so cool. So it's really interesting that you're working on this and also talking about applying the same kind of all the ideas of some of which you've talked about with data engine, all the things that we're talking about with Tesla autopilot. Just transferring that over to the just yet another robotic problem. I have to ask since I care about human robot interaction, so the human side of that. So you've talked about mostly in the factory. Do you see it also, do you see part of this problem that Tesla bot has to solve is interacting with humans and potentially having a place like in the home. So interacting not just not replacing labor, but also like, I don't know, I think we're a friend or an assistant. I think the possibilities are endless. Yeah, I mean, it's obviously like a it's not quite in Tesla's primary mission direction of accelerating sustainable energy, but it is an extremely useful thing that we can do for the world, which is to make a useful humanoid robot. That is capable of interacting with the world and helping in many different ways. So in fact, reason, I mean, I think if you say like extrapolates to many years in the future, I think work will become optional. So like there's a lot of jobs that if you were people, if people weren't paid to do it, they wouldn't do it. Like it's not, it's not fun, you know, necessarily. Like if you're watching dishes all day, it's like, you know, even if you really like watching dishes, you really want to do it for eight hours a day every day, probably not. So, and then it's like dangerous work and basically if it's dangerous boring, it has like potential for repetitive stress injury, that kind of thing. Then that's really where humanoid robots would add the most value initially. So that's what aiming for is to for the human to draw us to do jobs that people don't voluntarily want to do. And then that will have to pair that obviously with some kind of universal basic income in the future. So I think. Do you see a world when there's like hundreds of millions of Tesla bots doing different performing different tasks throughout the world? Yeah, I haven't really thought about it that far in the future, but I guess there may be something like that. So, Jessica wild question. So the number of Tesla cars has been accelerating. It's been close to two million produced. Many of them have auto pilot. I think we're over two million now. Do you think there will ever be a time when there will be more Tesla bots than Tesla cars? Yeah, I actually, it's funny you ask this question because normally I do try to think I'm pretty far into the future, but I haven't really thought that far into the future with the Tesla bot or it's codenamed Optimus. I call it Optimus subprime. Because it's not something like a giant, you know, transformer robot. So I bet it's meant to be a general purpose, help for bot. And basically like the things that we're basically like Tesla, I think is the most advanced real world AI for interacting with the real world, which should develop as a function of self-driving work. And so along with custom hardware and like a lot of hardcore low level software to have it run efficiently and be power efficient. Because it's one thing to do neural nets if you got a gigantic sober room with 10,000 computers. But now let's say you just you have to now distill that down into one computer that's running at low power in a humanoid robot or a car. That's actually very difficult and a lot of hardcore software work is required for that. So so since we're kind of like solving the navigate the real world with neural nets problem for cars, which are kind of robots with four wheels, then it's like kind of a natural extension of that is to put it in a robot with arms and legs and actuators. So like like the two hard things are like you basically need to make the how the robot being intelligent enough to interact in a sensible way with the environment. So you need real world AI and you need to be very good at manufacturing, which is a very hard problem. It tells us very good manufacturing and also has the real world AI. So making the humanoid robot work is basically means developing custom motors and sensors that are different for a car would use. But we also we have a I think we have the best expertise in developing advanced electric motors and power electronics. So it just has to be for humanoid robot application or a car. Still you do talk about love sometimes. So let me ask this isn't like for like sex robots or something. I love the answer. Yes. There is something compelling to us not compelling, but we connect with humanoid robots or even like robots like with the dog and shapes of dogs. It just it seems like you know there's a huge amount of loneliness in this world. All of us seek companionship with other humans friendship and all those kinds of things. We have a lot of here in Austin, a lot of people have dogs. So there seems to be a huge opportunity to also have robots that decrease the the amount of loneliness in the world or help us humans connect with each other. So in the way that dogs can. Do you think about that? Would test about it all or is it really focused on the problem of performing specific tasks, not connecting with humans? I mean to be honest, I have not actually thought about it from the companion chip standpoint, but I think it actually would end up being it could be actually a very good companion. And it could develop like a personality over time that is that is like unique. Like you know it's not like they're just all the robots are the same. And that personality could evolve to be you know match match the the owner or the you know, yes, the owner. Well, what if you want to call it the other half right. The same way the friends do see I think that's a huge opportunity. I think yeah, no, that's interesting. Like the because you know like there's a Japanese phrase like the wabi savvy, you know the subtle imperfections or what makes something special. Yeah, and the subtle imperfections of the personality the robot mapped to the subtle imperfections of the robots human. Friend, I don't know owner sounds like maybe the wrong word, but could actually make an incredible buddy basically in that way the imperfections are too deep to or like a see through pure sort of thing. So from a machine learning perspective, I think the flaws being a feature is really nice. You could be quite terrible at being a robot for quite a while in the general home environment or all the general world. And that's kind of adorable. And that's like those are your flaws and you love those flaws. So it's a very different than autonomous driving where it's a very high stakes environment you cannot mess up. So it's yeah, it's more fun to be a robot in the home. Yeah, in fact, if you think of like C3PO and R2D2, like they actually had a lot of like flaws and imperfections and silly things and they're to argue with each other. And were they actually good at doing anything exactly sure. They definitely added a lot to the story. But there's sort of quirky elements and you know that they would like make mistakes and do you think it was like it made them relatable. I don't know. Enduring. So yeah, I think that that could be something that probably would happen. Our initial focus is just to make it useful. So I'm confident we'll get it done. I'm not sure what the exact time frame is. But I probably have, I don't know, a decent prototype towards the end of next year or something like that. And it's cool that it's connected to Tesla the car. So yeah, it's using a lot of, you know, it would use the autopilot inference computer and a lot of the training that we've done for the four cars. In terms of recognizing real world things could be applied directly to the robot. So it's but there's there's a lot of custom actuators and sensors that need to be developed. And an extra module on top of the vector space for love. Yeah, that's me say. Okay, got to the car too. That's true. That could be useful in all environments. Like you said, a lot of people argue in the car. So maybe we can help them out. Your student of history, fan of Dan Carlin's hardcore history podcast. Yeah, it's great. Greatest podcast ever. Yeah, I think it is actually. It's almost doesn't really count as a podcast. It's more like an audiobook. Yeah, so you were on the podcast with Dan and just had a chat with them about it. He said you guys want military and all that kind of stuff. Yeah, it's literally it was basically. It should be titled engineer wars, essentially like that when this rapid change in the rate of technology, then engineering plays a pivotal role in in victory and battle. How far back in history did you go to go over to it was mostly well, it was supposed to be a deep dive on fighters and bomber technology in World War two. But they ended up being more wide ranging than that. Because I just went down the atola Rahol of like studying all of the fighters and bombers of World War two and like the constant rock paper says this game that like, you know, one country would make this plan that I make it to be that and that much I make plan to be that and then the day. And really what matters like the pace of innovation and also access to high quality fuel and room materials. So like Germany had like some amazing designs, but they couldn't make them because they couldn't get the room materials and they had a real problem with oil and fuel basically the fuel quality was extremely variable. So the design wasn't the bottleneck is yeah, like the US had kick ass fuel that was like very consistent like the problem is if you make a very high performance aircraft engine in order to make high performance, you have to. The the the the fuel the aviation gas has to be a consistent mixture and it has a high octane. Like high octane is the most important thing, but also can't have like impurities and stuff because you'll you'll fall up the engine and German just never had good access oil like they try to get it by invading the cocauses. But that didn't work too well. That never works well. That's me. So they're always just Germany was always struggling with with basically shitty oil and then they could not they couldn't count on a on high quality fuel for their aircraft. And then they had to add all the have all these additives and stuff. So where it was the US had awesome fuel and that provided that to Britain as well. So that allowed the British and the Americans to design aircraft engines that were super high performance better than anything else in the world. And Germany could could could design the interest interested in how the fuel and then also the right likes that the quality of the aluminum allies that they were getting was also not that great. And so you know, this is just like the you talked about all this with them. Yeah. Awesome. Broadly looking at history when you look at Jenga Skahn when you look at Stalin Hitler the darkest moments of human history. What do you take away from those moments does it help you gain insight about human nature about human behavior today. Whether it's the wars or the individuals or just the behavior of people and the aspects of history. I find history fascinating. There's a lot of incredible things that have been done good and bad that they help you just help you understand the nature of civilization and individuals. Just make you sad that humans do these kinds of things to each other. You look at the 20th century World War II the cruelty of the abuse of power talk about communism Marxism and Stalin. I mean, some of these things do I mean if you like there's a lot of human history. Most of it is actually people just getting on with their lives. You know, and it's not like human history is just what nonstop war and disaster is that those are actually just those are intermittent and rare. If they weren't then the humans would soon cease to exist. It's just that wars tend to be written about a lot and whereas like something being like well a normal year where nothing major happened was just getting about much. But that's in most people just like farming and kind of like living their life you know being a villager somewhere. And every now and again there's a war and a thing. So. And you know what I have to say like the. There aren't very many books that I where I just had to start reading because it was just too too dark. But the book about Stalin the quarter of the Reds are. I had to start reading it was just too too dark. Rough. Yeah. The 30s. There's a lot of lessons there to me in particular that it feels like humans like all of us have that is the soul genius in line. That the line between good and evil runs to the heart and every man that all of us are capable of evil all of us are capable of good it's almost like this kind of responsibility that. All of us have to to to tend towards the good. And so like to me looking at history is almost like an example of look you have some charismatic leader that convinces you of things is too easy based on that story to do evil onto each other onto your family and others. And so it's like our responsibility to do good. It's not like now somehow different from history that can happen again all of it can happen again. And yes most of the time you're right. I mean the optimistic view here is mostly people are just living life and as you've often meamed about the quality of life was way worse back in the day and keeps improving over time through innovation to technology. But still it's somehow notable that these blimps of atrocities happen. Sure. Yeah I mean life was really tough most of history. I mean really for most of human history a good year would be one where not that many people in your village died of the plague, starvation, freezing to death or being killed by a neighboring village. It's like well it wasn't that bad you know it was only like you know we lost five percent this year that was. Yeah it was good here you know that would be for the course. Yeah. Like just not starving to death would have been like the primary goal of most people in through it's right history is making sure we'll have enough foods last with the winner and not get in our freezer or whatever. So now food is is plan a full we have an obesity problem. Well yeah the lesson there is to be grateful for the way things are now for for some of us. We've spoken about the soft line. I'd love to get your thought about it here. If I sat down for a long form in person conversation with the president of Russia Vladimir Putin. Would you potentially want to call in for a few minutes to join in on a conversation with them moderated translated by me. Sure yeah sure I'll be happy to do that. You've shown interest in the Russian language is this grounded in your interest in history of linguistics culture, general curiosity. I think it sounds cool. Sounds cool not looks cool. Well it's you know it's it's it's it's it takes a moment to read to relic. What once you know what the sort of like characters stand for actually then reading Russian becomes a lot easier because there are a lot of words that are actually the same like bank is bank. And so find the words they're exactly the same and now you start to understand the real it. If you can if you can sound it out. It's much there's at least some commonality of words. What about the culture. You love great engineering physics. There's a tradition of the sciences there. Sure we look at the 20th century from rocketry. Some of the greatest rockets of the space exploration has been done in the Soviet and the former Soviet Union. Yeah. So do you draw inspiration from that history just how this culture that in many ways I mean one of the sad things is because of the language a lot of it is lost to history because it's not translated all those kinds of because it is in some ways an isolated culture. If flourishes within it's within its borders. Yeah. So do you draw inspiration from those folks from the history of science engineering there in the Soviet Union Russia and Ukraine as well and have a really strong history in space flight. Like some of the most advanced and impressive things in history were done. You know by the Soviet Union. So one can cannot help but admire the impressive rocket technology that was developed. After the so full of the Soviet Union there's there's there's much less that that happened. But still things are happening but it's not quite at the frenetic pace that was happening before the Soviet Union kind of dissolved into separate revolts. Yeah. I mean I I you know there's Roskosmos the Russian the agency I look forward to a time when those countries with China working together. You in the United States are all working together maybe a little bit friendly competition but I think friendly competition is good. You know government so slow and the only thing slower than one government is a collection of governments. So yeah the Olympics would be boring if everyone just crossed the finishing line at the same time. Yeah. Nobody would watch. Yeah. And and people wouldn't try hard to run fast and stuff. So I think friendly competition is a good thing. This is also a good place to give a shout out to a video titled the entire Soviet rocket engine family tree by Tim Dodd aka Everyday Astronaut. It's like an hour and a half. It gives a full history of Soviet rockets. And people should definitely go check on support Tim in general. That guy is super excited about the future super excited about space fight. Every time I see anything by him I just have a stupid smile on my face because he's so excited about stuff. Yeah. Tim Dodd is a really great fear of anything to a space. He's in terms of explaining rocket technology to your average person. He's awesome the best I'd say. And I should say like the parties and like I switched us from like we're after at one point there's going to be a hydrogen engine. But hydrogen has a lot of challenges. It's very low density. It's a deep cryogen. So it's only liquid at a very very close absolute zero requires a lot of insulation. So it's a lot of a lot of challenges there. And I was actually reading a bit about Russian rocket engine development and at least the impression I had was that. So we do you know Russia and Ukraine primarily were actually in the process of switching to methalox. And there was some interesting test and data for ISP like they were able to get like after like a 380 second ISP with the methalox engine. And I was like, well, okay, that's that's actually really impressive. So, so I think we could you can actually get. It's a much lower cost like an optimizing cost per time to over cost per time to Mars. It's I think. Methane oxygen is the way to go. And I was partly inspired by the Russian work on the test ends with methalox engines. And now for something completely different. Do you mind doing a bit of a meme review in the spirit of the great the powerful PewDiePie? Let's say one to 11 just go over a few documents printed out. We can try. Let's try this. I present to you document number uno. Okay. Vladimir Pailer discovers marshmallows. That's not bad. So you get it because he's failing things. Yes, I get it. I don't know three, whatever. That's not very good. This is ground in some engineering, some history. Yeah, give us an eight out of 10. What do you think about nuclear power? I'm in favor of nuclear power. I think it's a. In a place that is not subject to extreme natural disasters, I think it's a nuclear power is a great way to generate electricity. I don't think we should be shutting down nuclear power stations. Yeah, but what about your novel? I think it's not exactly. So I think people that there's like a lot of fear of radiation and stuff. And it's I guess probably like a lot of people just don't understand. They didn't study. Engineering or physics. So they're it's just the word radiation just sounds scary. You know, so they don't they can't calibrate what radiation means. Radiation is much less dangerous than than you think. So like for example, Fukushima, you know, when the Fukushima problem happened, do the tsunami, the I got people in California asking me if they should worry about radiation from Fukushima. I'm like, definitely not not even slightly not at all. That is crazy. And just to show like look, this is how. Like the dangers is so much overplayed compared to what what it really is that I actually flew to Fukushima. And I actually I donated a solar power system for water treatment plant. And and I made a point of eating locally grown vegetables on TV in Fukushima. Like I'm still alive. Okay. So it's not even at the risk of these events as low, but the impact of them is. It's impact is greatly exaggerated. It's just a nature. People don't know what radiation is like I've had people ask me like what about radiation from cell phones, according to the causing brain cancer. I'm like, when you say radiation, do you mean photons or particles? The like that I don't know what would you mean photons particles? Do you mean? Let's say photons what what frequency or wavelength? And they're like not an idea. Like do you know that everything's radiating all the time? Like what do you mean? Like yeah, everything's radiating all the time. Photons are being emitted by by all objects all the time basically. So and she want to know what it's what it means to stand in front of nuclear fire. Go outside. The sun is a gigantic, you know, thermonuclear reactor that you're staring right at it. Are you still alive? Yes. Okay, amazing. Yeah, I guess radiation is one of the words that could be used as a tool to fear monger by certain people. I think we'll just don't understand. I mean, that's the way to fight that fear I suppose is to understand, is to learn. Yeah, just say like, okay, how many people have actually died from nuclear accidents? It's like practically nothing. Say how many people have died from coal plants and it's a very big number. So like obviously we should not be starting up coal plants and shutting down nuclear plants. It just doesn't make any sense at all. Coal plants like I don't know, a hundred to a thousand times worse for health and nuclear power plants. You want to go to the next one? This is really bad. It's that 90, 180 and 360 degrees. Everybody loves the math. Nobody gives a shit about 270. It's not super funny. I don't like 203. Yeah. This is not, you know, a level of situation. Yeah. That's pretty good. The United States oscillating between establishing and destroying dictatorships. It's like a metric. Is that a metric? Yeah, what does that mean? What does that mean? Yeah. It's out of seven out of ten. It's kind of true. Oh yeah, this is kind of personal for me. Next one. Oh man, this is Lyca. Yeah. Well, no. Or it's like referring to Lyca or something? It's like a husband. Husband. Yeah. Hello. Yes, this is Dog. Your wife was launched into space. And then the last one is him with his eyes closed in the bottle of vodka. Yeah. And then he comes back. No. They don't tell you the full story of, you know, what the impact they had on the loved ones. That one gets an 11 for me. Sure. The Soviet. I know. Yeah, this keeps going on the Russian theme. First man in space. Nobody cares. First man in the moon. I think people do care. No, I know. But there's your Gagarin's names will be forever in history, I think. There is something special about placing like stepping foot onto another, truly foreign land. It's not the journey. Like people that explore the oceans. It's not as important to explore the oceans as to land on a whole new continent. Yeah. This is about you. Oh, yeah, I'd love to get your comment on this. You all must, after sending 6.6 billion dollars to the UN to end world hunger, you have three hours. Yeah, obviously 6 billion dollars is not going to end world hunger. So, I mean, the reality is at this point, the world is producing a form of food that can really consume it. Like we don't have a caloric constraint to this point. So where there is hunger, it is almost always due to like civil war or strife or some like, it's not a thing that is extremely rare for it to be just a matter of lack of money. It's like, you know, it's like some civil war in some country and then like one part of the country is literally trying to starve the other part of the country. So it's much more complex than something that money could solve. It's geopolitics. It's a lot of things. It's human nature. It's governments, it's money, monetary systems, all that kind of stuff. Yeah, food is extremely cheap these days. It's like, I mean, the US at this point, you know, among low income families obesity is the actual, now the problem. It's not, like obviously it's not hunger. It's like too many calories. So I said, it's not that nobody's hungry anywhere. It's just, this is not a simple matter of adding money and solving it. What do you think that one gets? It's getting too. It's going after empire is world. Where did you get those artifacts? The British Museum. It shut out to Antipython. We found them. Yeah, the British Museum. It's pretty great. I mean, it admittedly Britain did take these historical artifacts all around the world and put them in London. But you know, it's not like people can't go see them. So it is a convenient place to see these ancient artifacts is London for, you know, for a large segment of the world. So I think, you know, on balance, the British Museum is a net good. Although I've showed a lot of countries are all about that. Yeah. It's like you want to make these historical artifacts accessible to as many people as possible. And the British Museum, I think there's a good job of that. Even if there's a darker aspect to like the history of empire in general, whatever the empire is, however things were done, it is the history that happened. You can't sort of erase that history, unfortunately. You could just become better in the future. It's the point. Yeah. And it's like, well, how are we going to pass moral judgment on these things? Like it's like, you know, if one is going to judge, say the British Empire, you got to judge, you know, whatever one was doing at the time and how were the British relative to everyone. And I think that the British would actually get like a relatively good grade, relatively good grade, not an absolute terms. But compared to what everyone else was doing, they were not the worst. Like I said, you got to look at these things in the context of the history at the time and say, what were the alternatives and what are you comparing it against? And I do not think it would be the case that Britain would get a bad grade when looking at history at the time. No, if you judge history from, you know, from what is morally acceptable today, you're basically going to give everyone a feeling grade. Yeah. I'm not clear. So I don't think anyone would get a passing grade in their morality of like you go back 300 years ago, like who's getting a passing grade? Basically no one. And we might not get a passing grade from generations that come after us. What does that one get? Sure. Success. For the Monty Python maybe. I always love Monty Python. They're great. I'm like Ryan and the Quistle Hall of Grail are incredible. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Those serious eyebrows. Brasch now. Like how important is getting these facial hair to great leadership? Well, you got a new haircut. Is that, is that, how does that affect your leadership? I don't know. Hopefully not. It doesn't. Um, yeah, the second is no one. There's no way. Can we represent them? No one to those of like epic eyebrows. So sure, I think it's like the Shakespeare analysis of names. I've read it had a flat for drama as well. Like, you know, showmanship. Yeah. Yeah. It must come from eyebrows. Invention, great engineering. Look what I invented. That's the best thing since ripped up bread. Because they invented slice bread. Am I just explaining memes at this point? This will my life has become... You can meme more if you explain it. I'm a meme, what it, like a scribe that runs around with the kings and just writes down memes. When was the cheeseburger invented? That's an epic invention. That was just a burger. Or a burger, I guess a burger in general. Then there's like, what is a burger? What's a sandwich? And then you start getting pizza sandwich. It gets into an anthology argument. If you order a burger or cheeseburger, you get tomato and some lettuce and onions and whatever. You know, mayor and ketchup mustard. It's like epic. Yeah, but I'm sure they've had bread and meat separately for a long time. And it was kind of a burger on the same plate. But somebody who actually combined them into the same thing. And the bite and hold it makes it convenient. It's a materials problem. Like your hands don't get dirty and whatever. Yeah, it's a good way to top it. And what do we need to do to make it? Well, that is not what I would have guessed. But everyone knows, like, if you order a cheeseburger, you know what you're getting. It's not like some obtuse. Like, well, I wonder what I'll get. You know, fries are, I mean, great. I mean, they're with the devil, but fries are awesome. And yeah, pizza is incredible. Food innovation doesn't get enough love. Yeah, I guess is what we're getting at. It's great. What about the Matthew McHenry Austin right here? President Kennedy, do you know how to put men on the moon yet? Now, President Kennedy, be a lot cooler if you did. Pretty much. Sure. Six, six or seven. That's the last one. That's funny. Someone drew a bunch of takes all over the walls, a 16 chapel, boys, bathed. Sure, I'll give it nine. It's super, it's really true. This is our highest ranking meme for today. I mean, it's true. Like, how did they get away with that? Lots of nakedness. We dickpecks are, I mean, just something throughout history. As long as people can draw things, there's been a dickpeck. It's the staple of human history. It's a staple. It's just throughout human history. You tweeted that you aspire to comedy, your friends with Joe Rogan, might you do a short stand-up comedy set at some point in the future? Maybe open for Joe, something like that. Is that, is that, is that, actually, just below on stand-up? For a long stand-up, is that in there or is that, I've never thought about that. It's extremely difficult. At least that's what the, like, Joe says in the comedian's say. Huh. I wonder if I could. I mean, I want a way to find out. You know, I have done stand-up for friends, just in prompt to, you know, I'll get on like a roof. And they do laugh, but they're our friends too. So, I don't know if you've got a court, you know, like a room of strangers, are they going to actually also find it funny? But I could try, see what happens. I think you'd learn something either way. Yeah. I kind of love both the, when you bomb and when you do great, just watching people, how they deal with it. It's so difficult. It's so, you're so fragile up there. It's just you. And you're thinking you're going to be funny, and when it completely falls flat, it's just, it's beautiful to see people deal with like that. I think I might have enough material to do stand-up. I've never thought about it, but I might have enough material. I don't know, like 15 minutes of something. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Do a Netflix special. A Netflix special. Sure. What's your favorite Rick and Morty concept? Just to spring that on you. Is there, there's a lot of sort of scientific engineering ideas explored there. There's the, there's the butter robot. It's great to, it's great show. Yeah, Rick and Morty's awesome. Somebody that's exactly like you from an alternate dimension showed up there. Elon Tusk. Yeah, that's right. They you voiced. Yeah. Rick and Morty certainly explores a lot of interesting concepts. I like what's the favorite one. The butter robot certainly is, you know, it's like, it's certainly possible to have too much sentience in a device. Like you don't want to have your toast to be like a super genius toaster. It's going to hate life because it'll make his toast. But if, you know, it's like you don't want to have like super into it, just stuck in a very limited device. Do you think it's too easy from a, if we're talk about from the engineering perspective of super intelligence like with Marvin the robot? Like is it, it seems like it might be very easy to engineer just a depressed robot. Like it, it's not obvious to engineer an robot that's going to find a fulfilling existence. Same as humans I suppose. But I wonder if that's like the default. If you don't do a good job on building a robot, it's going to be sad a lot. Well, we can reprogram robots easier than we can reprogram humans. So I guess if you let it evolve without tinkering, then it might get to a sad. But you can change the optimization function and have it be a true robot. You, like I mentioned with SpaceX, you give a lot of people hope and a lot of people look up to millions of people look up to you. If we think about young people in high school, maybe in college, what advice would you give to them about if they want to try to do something big in this world, they want to really have a big positive impact? What advice would you give them about their career, maybe about life in general? Try to be useful. Do things that are useful to your fellow human beings to the world. It's very hard to be useful. Very hard. Are you contributing more than you consume? Like, try to have a positive net contribution to society. I think that's the thing to aim for. Not to try to be a leader for the sake of being a leader or whatever. A lot of time with people who want to be leaders or other people who don't want to be leaders. If you live a useful life, that is a good life, a life with having lived. I would encourage people to use the mental tools of physics and apply them broadly in life. They are the best tools. When you think about education and self-education, what do you recommend? There's the university, there's a self-study, there is a hands-on, sort of finding a company or a place or a set of people that do the thing you're passionate about and joining them as early as possible. There's taking a road trip across Europe for a few years and writing some poetry, which trajectory do you suggest? In terms of learning about how you can become useful, as you mentioned, how you can have the most positive impact. I encourage people to read a lot of books. I basically try to ingest as much information as you can and try to also just develop a good general knowledge. You at least have a rough way of the knowledge landscape. Try to learn a little about a lot of things. How would you know what you're really interested in if you aren't doing it perfectly exploration abroadly of the knowledge landscape? You talk to people for different walks of life and different industries and professions and skills and archipages like just try to learn as much as possible. Man search for meaning. Isn't the whole thing a search for meaning? What's meaning of life? I encourage people to read broadly in many different subject areas. Try to find something where there's an overlap of your talents and what you're interested in. People may be good at something but they may have skill at a particular thing but they don't like doing it. You want to try to find a thing where that's a good combination of the things that you're inherently good at but you also like doing. Reading is a super fast shortcut to figure out which where are you? You're both good at it. You like doing it and it will actually have positive impact. You've got to learn about things somehow. Reading a broad range, really read it. One point was that kid I read through the encyclopedia. That was pretty helpful. There are also things that have never existed a lot. It's like as broad as it gets. Encyclopedia is where it's adjustable I think. I read about it 40 years ago. So, you know, maybe read through the condensed version of the encyclopedia Britannica. I'd recommend that. You can always like skip subjects where you read a few paragraphs and you know you're not interested. Just jump to the next one. So read the encyclopedia or scan through it. Put a lot of stock into a lot of respect for someone who puts in on a state's work to do useful things. And just generally to have like not a zero sum mindset or have more of a grow the pie mindset. If you sort of say like when we see people like perhaps including some very smart people. Kind of taking an attitude of like doing things that seem like morally questionable. It's often because they have at a base sort of axiomatic level a zero sum mindset. And they without realizing it. They don't realize they have a zero sum mindset or at least they don't realize it consciously. And so if you have a zero sum mindset, the only way to get ahead is by taking things from others. If it's like if the if the if the pie is fixed, then the only way to have more pie is to take someone else's pie. But this is false. Like obviously the pie has grown dramatically over time, the economic pie. So the reality you can have. So overuse this analogy. You can have a lot of you can have this a lot of pie. Yeah. My pie is not fixed. So you really want to make sure you don't you're not operating without realizing it from a zero sum mindset. Where the only way to get ahead is to take things from others. Then that's going to result in you take trying to take things from others, which is not not good. It's much better to work on adding to the economic pie. So creating like say creating more than you consume doing more than you. So that's that's a big deal. I think there's like a fair number of people in finance that do have a bit of a zero sum mindset. I mean, it's all walks of life. I've seen that one of the one of the reasons Rogan inspires me is he celebrates all there's a lot. There's not not creating a constant competition. Like there's a scarcity of resources. What happens when you celebrate others, any promote others, the ideas of others, it actually grows that pie. I mean, every like the resource, the resources become less scarce. And that applies in a lot of kinds of domains. It applies in academia where a lot of people are very see some funding for academic research is zero sum. And it is not. If you celebrate each other, if you make, if you get everybody to be excited about AI, about physics above mathematics, I think it there'll be more and more funding. And I think everybody wins. Yeah, that applies, I think broadly. Yeah, yeah, that's exactly. So last last question about love and meaning. What is the role of love in the human condition broadly and more specific to you? How has love romantic love or otherwise made you a better person? A better human being. Better engineer. Now you're asking really complex questions. It's hard to give a, I mean, there are many books, poems and songs written about what is love. And what is what exactly, you know, what is love figured out hurt me? That's one of the great ones. Yes. Yeah, you've, you've earlier quoted Shakespeare, but that that's really up there. Yeah. I mean, love is many splendid thing. I mean, there's, because we've talked about so many inspiring things like be useful in the world, sort of like solve problems, alleviate suffering, but it seems like connection between humans as a source. You know, it's a source of joy, it's a source of meaning. And that's what love is, friendship, love. I just wonder if you think about that kind of thing. When you talk about preserving the light of human consciousness, and us becoming a multi-planetary species. I mean, to me at least, that means like if we're just alone and conscious and intelligent, it doesn't mean nearly as much as if we're with others. Right. And there's some magic created when we're together. The, the, the French of it, and I think the highest form of it is love, which I think broadly is much bigger than just sort of romantic. So yes, romantic love and family and those kinds of things. Well, I mean, the reason I guess I care about us becoming a multi-planet species in a space-fraining civilization is foundationally I love humanity. And, and so I wish to see it prosper and do great things and be happy. And if I did not love humanity, I would not care about these things. So when you look at the whole of it, the human history, all the people has ever lived, all the people alive now. It's pretty, we're okay. And, and the whole, we're pretty interesting bunch. Yeah. Well, things considered. And I've read a lot of history, including the darkest, worst parts of it. And despite all that, I think on balance, I still love humanity. You joked about it with the 42. What do you think is the meaning of this whole thing? Is it like, is there a non-Numeric? Oh, I appreciate that. Yeah, well, really, I think what Doug Thames was saying in Hitchhack's Guide to the Galaxy is that the universe is the answer. And what we really need to figure out are what questions to ask about the answer that is the universe. Yeah. And that the question is the really the hard part. And if you can properly frame the question, then the answer will be speaking as easy. So, so therefore, if you want to understand what questions to ask about the universe, you want to understand the meaning of life. And we need to expand the scope and scale of consciousness so that we're better able to understand the nature of the universe and understand the meaning of life. And ultimately, the most important part will be to ask the right question. Yes. Thereby elevating the role of the interviewer. Yes, exactly. As the most important human in the room. Good questions are, you know, it's hard. It's hard to come up with good questions. Absolutely. But yeah, like it's like that is the foundation of my philosophy is that I am curious about the nature of the universe. And, you know, and obviously I will die. I don't know when I'll die, but I won't live forever. But I would like to know that we're on a path to understanding the nature of the universe and the meaning of life and what questions to ask about the answer that is the universe. And so if we expand the scope and scale of humanity and consciousness in general, which includes silicon consciousness, then. That, you know, that that seems like a fundamentally good thing. So, like I said, I'm deeply grateful that you will spend your extremely valuable time with me today. And also that you are given millions of people hope in this difficult time, this divisive time. And this cynical time. So I hope you do continue doing what you're doing. Thank you so much for talking to me. Hi, you're welcome. Thanks for your excellent questions. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Elon Musk. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, let me leave you some words from Elon Musk himself. When something is important enough, you do it even if the odds are not in your favor. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.